response_id	target_score	answer_text	intended_error_pattern
S001	0	The construction destroyed the weaker plants so now only the strong ones are left, which means natural selection is happening. The population will have more genetic diversity because the surviving plants are the fittest.	Confuses drift with natural selection; predicts increased diversity; doesn't understand bottleneck effect
S002	0	The sudden change in allele frequencies is caused by random mating. When plants randomly interbreed, the alleles will change randomly.	Confuses random mating with genetic drift; vague mechanism
S003	0	This is an example of gene flow because new plants aren't coming into the population anymore. Gene flow reduces the genetic diversity, so that's why the diversity will decrease.	Misidentifies mechanism as gene flow; gets correct outcome by accident
S004	0	The 90% destruction is natural selection working on the population. The flowers that survived must have had better traits for surviving the construction, so they have the best alleles now.	Incorrectly attributes drift to selection; fails to recognize random nature of destruction
S005	0	Genetic diversity will stay the same because the surviving plants still have all the same genes. Even though there are fewer plants, they still have the F and f alleles so nothing changed.	Doesn't understand diversity is based on frequency; ignores bottleneck consequences
S006	0	Mutation is causing the allele frequencies to change because without mutations there can't be evolution. The genetic diversity will increase because mutations create new alleles.	Misattributes cause to mutation; ignores no mutation assumption in problem
S007	0	The surviving population is now in Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium so the allele frequencies won't change anymore. Natural selection and genetic drift don't apply here because random mating happens.	Incorrectly applies HWE; misunderstands conditions; denies drift in small population
S008	1	The event is genetic drift because some alleles were randomly lost when the population got smaller. But since random mating still occurs, the gene pool will eventually restore itself and genetic diversity will come back.	Correctly identifies drift but wrongly predicts diversity recovery without gene flow/mutation
S009	1	This is the bottleneck effect, a type of genetic drift. The surviving plants will have different allele frequencies than the original population, but over time they will return to the original frequencies because the population is still randomly mating.	Correctly identifies bottleneck; but fails to understand drift continues in small population
S010	1	Genetic drift is responsible for the change in allele frequencies. Some alleles might randomly become more common while others disappear, which reduces genetic diversity. Without gene flow, the population will just keep drifting.	Gets genetic drift correct; reasonable on diversity; vague about mechanisms but acceptable
S011	1	The construction project is an example of a genetic bottleneck. The population got smaller so some alleles might be lost by chance. The genetic diversity will be reduced because there are fewer individuals to carry alleles, but the heterozygosity might stay the same.	Correct identification; understands allele loss; confused about heterozygosity vs allele diversity
S012	1	This is genetic drift affecting the population. Natural selection doesn't apply here because the destruction was random, not based on the plants' fitness. Genetic diversity will decrease because alleles can randomly disappear in a small population.	Correctly identifies drift and rules out selection; correct on diversity; explanation is basic but sound
S013	1	The mechanism is genetic drift in the form of a population bottleneck. In a small population, allele frequencies change randomly even without natural selection. Genetic diversity will decrease over time because some alleles will be randomly lost just by chance.	Correct mechanism and explanation; correct prediction; reasoning is solid
S014	1	Genetic drift is the evolutionary mechanism. Random sampling of gametes causes allele frequencies to change in small populations. Genetic diversity will be lower in subsequent generations because alleles get lost when populations are small, but I'm not sure exactly how much it will decrease.	Correct identification; correct outcome; explanation could be clearer but fundamentally right
S015	1	The construction randomly killed 90% of the plants, which caused a bottleneck effect and genetic drift. Allele frequencies will change randomly because the surviving plants don't have all the alleles of the original population in the same proportions. Genetic diversity will be permanently reduced.	Correct mechanism; correct reasoning; "permanently reduced" is slightly imprecise but appropriate for the scenario
S016	2	This is genetic drift, specifically a bottleneck effect. The random destruction wasn't based on fitness, so natural selection doesn't explain the allele frequency change. In a small population, genetic drift becomes more powerful, and allele frequencies will change randomly. The genetic diversity will decrease because some alleles will randomly become fixed or lost.	Correct identification; correct explanation; addresses randomness vs selection; correct outcome with good mechanism
S017	2	Genetic drift is the answer to part A. Because the population was drastically reduced and the plants randomly interbreed, some alleles will increase in frequency by chance while others will decrease. Genetic diversity will be lower because alleles can be randomly lost in small populations.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; explanation is good but could be more detailed
S018	2	The bottleneck effect is the evolutionary mechanism responsible. When a population becomes small due to random events like the construction, genetic drift becomes a major force. Some alleles will be completely lost by chance, while others might randomly become more common. Genetic diversity will definitely decrease because the gene pool is smaller.	Good explanation of bottleneck; correct on drift; correct on reduced diversity; solid student answer
S019	2	This is an example of genetic drift caused by a bottleneck. The construction project removed individuals randomly, not based on any trait, so the surviving plants are just a random sample of the original population. This means the allele frequencies in the surviving population will be different from the original. Over time, genetic diversity will decrease because alleles can be randomly lost.	Correct identification; good reasoning about random sampling; correct outcome; explanation is clear
S020	2	Genetic drift is responsible for the change in allele frequencies because the population became too small. The plants that survived the construction were just random survivors, not necessarily the most fit ones. The genetic diversity will go down in future generations because random events can cause alleles to disappear entirely in small populations.	Correct mechanism; explicitly rules out selection; correct outcome; student reasoning is sound
S021	2	The bottleneck effect is the evolutionary mechanism. Since 90% of the population was randomly destroyed, the remaining plants don't represent the same allele frequencies as the original population. This is genetic drift. Genetic diversity will decrease over subsequent generations because alleles can be lost by random chance in a small population.	Correct identification; correct explanation; correct outcome with appropriate reasoning
S022	2	Genetic drift explains the sudden change in allele frequencies. The construction was random, not selective, so it's a bottleneck effect. The diversity will be reduced because in a small population, alleles are more likely to be lost by chance. Some alleles might even go extinct in the population.	Correct mechanism; correct reasoning; correct prediction; good understanding
S023	2	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift due to the bottleneck effect. When a large population suddenly becomes small through random events, allele frequencies change unpredictably because of chance events. The genetic diversity will decline because alleles can randomly disappear. Additionally, without mutation, there's no way to restore lost genetic variation.	Correct mechanism; correct explanation; addresses mutation correctly; well-reasoned answer
S024	2	This is definitely genetic drift. The random destruction of 90% means the surviving plants are a random sample of the original population, and their allele frequencies won't necessarily match the original population's. Genetic diversity will decrease because some alleles will likely be randomly lost in subsequent generations in this small population.	Correct identification; good explanation of sampling; correct outcome; reasoning is solid
S025	2	Genetic drift caused by a bottleneck is the answer. The population experienced a sudden reduction in size through random events. This causes random sampling of alleles, which changes allele frequencies. Genetic diversity will be permanently lower because some alleles may be lost by chance and cannot be regained without mutation or gene flow.	Correct mechanism; correct reasoning; correct outcome; good mention of mutation/gene flow
S026	2	The mechanism is genetic drift specifically the bottleneck effect. Random destruction of 90% of the population causes allele frequencies to change by chance. Since the remaining population is small, genetic drift will be very strong, causing genetic diversity to decrease. Some alleles will probably be lost forever.	Correct identification; correct explanation; correct outcome; mentions strength of drift in small populations
S027	2	This is an example of the bottleneck effect, which is a type of genetic drift. The construction randomly removed individuals, not because of natural selection, so the remaining population has different allele frequencies just by chance. Genetic diversity will be lower in future generations because alleles can be randomly eliminated in a small population.	Correct mechanism and type; correct reasoning; correct outcome; clear student explanation
S028	2	Genetic drift is the evolutionary mechanism because the population suddenly became very small. The allele frequencies changed randomly, not because of natural selection. The genetic diversity will decrease because in a small isolated population, some alleles will disappear by random chance.	Correct mechanism; correct reasoning; correct outcome; explanation is basic but accurate
S029	3	The evolutionary mechanism responsible is genetic drift, specifically the bottleneck effect. The construction project randomly destroyed 90% of the population without selecting for or against any particular traits, so the event was non-selective. The surviving population represents a random sample of the original population's genotypes. This means allele frequencies in the surviving population are likely different from the original frequencies just by chance.

The genetic diversity will be reduced in subsequent generations. In a small population, genetic drift becomes a strong evolutionary force. Alleles can be randomly lost through chance events in reproduction, and once an allele is lost, it cannot be regained without mutation or gene flow. Additionally, in a small population, there is increased probability of mating between related individuals, which can further reduce genetic diversity.	Correct mechanism; thorough explanation; correct outcome; mentions inbreeding; sophisticated student answer
S030	3	Genetic drift is the specific evolutionary mechanism. The random destruction of plants caused a bottleneck, suddenly reducing the population size. This random event, not natural selection, altered allele frequencies.

As for genetic diversity, it will decrease in subsequent generations. The smaller population size means fewer alleles are being passed on. Random loss of alleles through genetic drift becomes more likely with fewer individuals. Without mutation or gene flow to introduce new variation, the population will gradually lose genetic diversity.	Correct and well-explained mechanism; correct outcome with solid reasoning; good understanding of the process
S031	3	This is genetic drift caused by a bottleneck effect. The construction project was random and not based on fitness, so natural selection is not the answer. The surviving plants are a random subsample of the original population. Their allele frequencies will differ from the original population due to random sampling.

Genetic diversity will decrease over time. In a small population, genetic drift is a powerful force. Alleles can be randomly lost by chance, and once lost, they're gone forever (since there's no mutation to create them again). The heterozygosity will decrease, and allele frequencies will become more extreme as alleles drift toward fixation or loss.	Correct mechanism; explicitly rules out selection; correct outcome; mentions fixation; well-developed answer
S032	3	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift, which occurs when a population becomes small. The construction project created a bottleneck by randomly removing individuals. This is not natural selection because the destruction was random and unrelated to plant fitness.

The genetic diversity will decrease in subsequent generations. A smaller population size means fewer individuals carrying different alleles. Genetic drift causes random fluctuations in allele frequency, and small populations are especially vulnerable to losing alleles entirely. Over generations, some alleles will probably drift to fixation (become very common) while others are lost.	Correct identification; clear explanation of bottleneck; correct outcome; mentions fixation; strong understanding
S033	3	The answer to part A is genetic drift, specifically the bottleneck effect. The destruction was random, not selective, so alleles changed frequency due to chance, not natural selection. The surviving population is a random sample of the original.

For part B, genetic diversity will decrease. In a small population, genetic drift randomly eliminates alleles. Once an allele is lost by chance, it stays lost (without mutation). The allele frequencies will become more extreme over generations, and genetic variation will decline.	Correct mechanism; clear reasoning; correct outcome; well-organized answer
S034	3	This is genetic drift due to a population bottleneck. The construction randomly killed plants, not selectively based on traits. Allele frequencies changed purely by chance because the survivors weren't a perfect representation of the original population's genetic makeup.

The genetic diversity will decrease over subsequent generations. Random sampling effects in small populations cause alleles to be lost by chance. Even if a population has the same alleles as before, the loss of genetic variation reduces diversity. Without new mutations or gene flow, diversity can only stay the same or decrease.	Correct mechanism; good reasoning; correct outcome; acknowledges allele loss
S035	3	Genetic drift is the evolutionary mechanism responsible. The bottleneck effect specifically reduced the population size randomly. The remaining plants represent a random sample of the original population's alleles. Because this was random destruction and not selection based on fitness, allele frequencies changed by chance alone.

The genetic diversity will be reduced in future generations. Smaller populations experience stronger genetic drift, which randomly eliminates alleles. Once an allele is lost, it cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow. Therefore, genetic diversity will steadily decrease.	Correct mechanism; clear explanation; correct outcome; mentions recovery requirements
S036	3	The specific evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift, caused by a bottleneck effect. The construction randomly destroyed 90% of the population, which is a non-selective event. This means allele frequencies changed due to random sampling of the surviving population, not due to natural selection.

Regarding genetic diversity, it will decrease over subsequent generations. Random genetic drift in small populations causes alleles to be randomly lost. As alleles are lost, genetic diversity decreases. Without mutation or gene flow occurring, these alleles cannot be replaced, so the population will have progressively less genetic diversity.	Correct identification; clear reasoning; correct outcome; addresses mutation/gene flow appropriately
S037	3	Genetic drift is responsible for the allele frequency change. The bottleneck occurred randomly through the construction project, causing the population to drastically shrink. The surviving individuals are a random subsample of the original population.

The genetic diversity will decrease because in a small population, random changes in allele frequency are more pronounced. Some alleles will be randomly lost entirely, decreasing the overall genetic diversity of the population. This process continues because there is no mutation or gene flow to restore lost alleles.	Correct mechanism; correct reasoning; correct outcome; acknowledges role of small population size
S038	3	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift, which is stronger in small populations. The construction project created a bottleneck by random destruction. This is not natural selection since the destruction was random, not based on fitness.

The genetic diversity will be lower in subsequent generations. Random genetic drift causes alleles to be lost by chance in small populations. Once alleles are lost, they cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow. Therefore, genetic diversity will progressively decline.	Correct mechanism; clear distinction from selection; correct outcome; good understanding
S039	3	This is genetic drift due to a bottleneck effect. The random destruction of 90% of the plants is a non-selective event, so natural selection is not the mechanism. The surviving population contains a random sample of the original population's alleles.

The genetic diversity will decrease over time. In smaller populations, genetic drift is more effective at randomly eliminating alleles. Without mutation or gene flow to introduce new alleles, the population loses genetic diversity. Allele frequencies will also become more extreme as alleles drift toward fixation or loss.	Correct mechanism; clear reasoning; correct outcome; mentions fixation; solid answer
S040	4	The evolutionary mechanism responsible is genetic drift, specifically the bottleneck effect. The construction project randomly destroyed 90% of the population in a non-selective manner, meaning the surviving individuals represent a random sample of the original population's genotypes. Due to random sampling alone, the allele frequencies in the surviving population will likely differ from the original population. This change in allele frequency due to chance events in a small population is the definition of genetic drift.

The genetic diversity of this population will decrease in subsequent generations. In small populations, genetic drift becomes a dominant evolutionary force. Random fluctuations in allele frequency can cause alleles to be lost by chance. Once an allele is randomly lost, it cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow (which are excluded in this problem). Therefore, the population will experience progressive loss of genetic diversity over generations. Additionally, in a very small population, the probability of fixation of alleles increases, meaning some alleles will become more common while others are eliminated entirely. The overall heterozygosity and allelic diversity will decline.	Complete and correct understanding of bottleneck effect, genetic drift, and diversity loss
S041	4	The specific evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift, caused by a bottleneck effect. The destruction of 90% of the population was a random event, not based on the fitness of individual plants. The surviving population is a random sample of the original population, meaning their allele frequencies may differ from the original population by chance. This random change in allele frequencies in a small population is genetic drift.

Over subsequent generations, genetic diversity will decrease. In small populations, genetic drift causes random fluctuations in allele frequency that often lead to the loss of alleles. Without mutation or gene flow, lost alleles cannot be recovered. The population will gradually lose genetic variation as some alleles reach fixation and others are lost entirely. The heterozygosity will decrease, and the population will become genetically less diverse.	Thorough explanation of drift mechanism and diversity loss; well-organized
S042	4	The mechanism is genetic drift due to a population bottleneck. The construction was a random event, not selective, so allele frequencies changed due to chance alone, not natural selection. The surviving plants represent a random subsample of the original population's alleles.

Genetic diversity will decrease over subsequent generations. In a small population, genetic drift causes random sampling effects that eliminate alleles by chance. Once an allele is lost, it cannot be restored without mutation or gene flow. Progressive allele loss will occur, leading to decreased heterozygosity and reduced genetic variation overall.	Correct mechanism; clear reasoning; correct outcome; concise and accurate
S043	4	The evolutionary mechanism responsible for the sudden change in allele frequencies is genetic drift, specifically the bottleneck effect. The construction project randomly destroyed 90% of the wildflowers without selecting for or against particular traits. The surviving population is therefore a random sample of the original population. The allele frequencies in this random sample will likely differ from the original population's frequencies due to chance alone. This is the definition of genetic drift.

The genetic diversity of the population will decrease in subsequent generations. Because the population is small, genetic drift becomes a strong evolutionary force. Random fluctuations in allele frequencies will cause some alleles to be lost by chance. Once an allele is lost, it cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow. Therefore, the population will experience progressive loss of genetic diversity. Some alleles will drift toward fixation, while others will be lost entirely.	Comprehensive and correct understanding of all concepts; excellent student answer
S044	4	Genetic drift caused by a bottleneck effect is the answer to part A. The random destruction of 90% of the population is a non-selective event. The surviving individuals are a random sample of the original population, so their allele frequencies differ from the original just by chance.

For part B, genetic diversity will definitely decrease. In a small population, genetic drift randomly causes alleles to be lost. Without mutation or gene flow, these alleles cannot be restored. Progressive loss of alleles will occur over generations, and the population will become less genetically diverse. Allele frequencies will also become more extreme as drift favors fixation and loss.	Correct mechanism and clear reasoning; correct outcome with good explanation
S045	4	The mechanism is genetic drift due to a bottleneck effect. The construction randomly removed 90% of the population, which is a non-selective event. The surviving population represents a random sample of the original population's alleles, so allele frequencies changed due to chance, not due to natural selection.

The genetic diversity will decrease in subsequent generations. Small populations are subject to stronger genetic drift effects. Random fluctuations will cause some alleles to be lost entirely. Without mutation or gene flow, the lost alleles cannot be recovered. The population will progressively lose genetic variation and become less heterozygous.	Complete and correct understanding; well-explained
S046	4	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift, specifically in the form of a bottleneck effect. The 90% destruction was random and non-selective, so the surviving individuals are a random subsample of the original population. Allele frequencies in this subsample will differ from the original population due to chance alone. This random change in allele frequency in a small population defines genetic drift.

Genetic diversity will decrease over subsequent generations. In small populations, genetic drift is a potent evolutionary force that randomly eliminates alleles through sampling error. Once alleles are lost, they cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow, which do not occur here. Therefore, the population will progressively lose genetic diversity as alleles are lost by chance.	Comprehensive and accurate; excellent understanding
S047	4	The specific evolutionary mechanism responsible is genetic drift, caused by a bottleneck effect. The construction project randomly destroyed 90% of the population without selecting based on plant fitness. The surviving plants represent a random sample of the original population. Their allele frequencies will likely differ from the original population due to random sampling effects, which is genetic drift.

The genetic diversity will be reduced in subsequent generations. In a small population, genetic drift becomes dominant. Random fluctuations in allele frequency cause alleles to be lost by chance. Without mutation or gene flow, lost alleles cannot be recovered. The population will experience progressive loss of genetic diversity, with some alleles reaching fixation and others being eliminated entirely.	Accurate and thorough explanation; excellent answer
S048	4	Genetic drift is the evolutionary mechanism. The bottleneck effect explains how the construction project randomly reduced the population size. The surviving population is a random sample of the original, so allele frequencies changed due to chance, not selection.

Genetic diversity will decrease because random genetic drift in small populations causes the loss of alleles. Once alleles are lost, they cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow. Therefore, diversity will progressively decline over generations as alleles are randomly eliminated.	Clear and correct; concise explanation of mechanism and outcome
S049	4	The answer is genetic drift through a bottleneck effect. The construction randomly killed plants without selecting for traits, so the surviving population is a random subsample of the original. Allele frequencies changed by chance.

The genetic diversity will decrease over time. Small populations lose genetic variation due to genetic drift. Alleles are randomly lost, and without mutation or gene flow, they can't be recovered. The population becomes less diverse with each generation.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; concise but complete
S050	4	The mechanism is genetic drift due to a population bottleneck. Allele frequencies changed due to random sampling of the surviving population, not due to natural selection. The surviving population is a random sample of the original population's alleles.

Genetic diversity will decrease in subsequent generations because genetic drift in small populations causes random loss of alleles. Without mutation or gene flow, diversity cannot be restored. The population will have reduced genetic variation over time.	Correct and accurate; well-reasoned
S051	2	Genetic drift is the mechanism because the population became smaller. The diversity will decrease because there are fewer plants to maintain all the alleles. Some alleles might be lost by chance in a small population like this.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; explanation is somewhat vague but acceptable
S052	2	This is the bottleneck effect, which is genetic drift. The construction randomly killed plants, so the surviving population has different allele frequencies. Genetic diversity will be lower because some alleles will be randomly lost in the small population.	Correct identification; correct outcome; reasoning is basic but sound
S053	2	Genetic drift is responsible because the population got really small really fast. The destruction was random, not selection. Genetic diversity will go down because alleles get lost in small populations.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; explanation is brief but essentially correct
S054	2	The bottleneck effect is genetic drift. The allele frequencies changed randomly in the surviving population. Genetic diversity will decrease because some alleles will randomly disappear.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; very brief but accurate
S055	2	Genetic drift caused the change because the population suddenly became very small. The surviving plants are a random sample of the original population. Genetic diversity will decrease over time because of random allele loss in a small population.	Correct mechanism; good reasoning; correct outcome; solid understanding
S056	2	This is genetic drift from a bottleneck. The random destruction means the surviving plants don't have the same allele frequencies as before. Genetic diversity will be reduced because alleles are randomly lost in small populations.	Correct mechanism; correct reasoning; correct outcome; acceptable student answer
S057	2	Genetic drift is the mechanism. It happens because the population is small and allele frequencies can change by chance. Genetic diversity will decrease because some alleles will be lost.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; explanation could be more detailed but is fundamentally right
S058	2	The bottleneck effect caused by genetic drift changed the allele frequencies. The remaining plants will lose genetic diversity because in small populations, alleles can randomly disappear.	Correct identification; correct outcome; somewhat unclear about mechanism but acceptable
S059	2	Genetic drift is happening here because the population became small. The genetic diversity will decrease because fewer individuals means fewer copies of alleles, and some alleles will likely be lost by chance.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; reasoning is basic but sound
S060	2	This is genetic drift from a population bottleneck. The allele frequencies changed randomly because the surviving population is a random sample. Genetic diversity will be lower because alleles can be randomly lost in a small population.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; good reasoning; solid answer
S061	1	The allele frequencies are changing due to genetic drift in a small population. But the genetic diversity might not change much because the plants still have both the F and f alleles in the population. Random mating will help maintain the genetic diversity.	Correctly identifies drift; incorrectly thinks diversity is maintained by random mating; misunderstands allele frequency vs diversity
S062	1	Genetic drift is the mechanism. The surviving population has different allele frequencies just by chance. But I think genetic diversity might stay the same or even increase because of the random mating that will occur.	Correctly identifies drift; incorrectly predicts diversity increase; misunderstands drift effects in small populations
S063	1	This is genetic drift because the population is now much smaller. The genetic diversity will be reduced, but over time it might recover to the original level because natural selection will work to maintain the alleles.	Correctly identifies drift; incorrectly thinks natural selection will restore diversity; misunderstands recovery mechanisms
S064	1	The mechanism is genetic drift in a bottleneck population. The diversity will decrease initially, but then the population will reach a new equilibrium and the diversity will stabilize at a new level.	Correctly identifies drift and bottleneck; incorrectly thinks diversity stabilizes without change; misunderstands continued drift effects
S065	1	Genetic drift is the answer because the population became small. The genetic diversity will decrease, but only temporarily because the larger population size will eventually recover and restore the genetic diversity.	Correctly identifies drift; misunderstands that population won't grow back; thinks diversity will recover on its own
S066	1	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift. In a small population, allele frequencies change randomly. However, genetic diversity will likely stay the same because the diversity is determined by the number of alleles, not the population size, so having fewer plants doesn't change the diversity.	Correctly identifies drift; major misconception that diversity is unaffected by population size; misunderstands diversity definition
S067	1	Genetic drift caused by the bottleneck is the mechanism. Allele frequencies will change randomly in the small population. Genetic diversity might actually increase because some alleles will be selected for by natural selection when the plants interbreed.	Correctly identifies drift and bottleneck; wrongly invokes natural selection; misunderstands diversity changes
S068	2	The mechanism is genetic drift, which happens because the population suddenly became very small. The allele frequencies changed due to chance, not because any plants were more fit than others. Genetic diversity will decrease because some alleles will be randomly lost in the small population.	Correct mechanism; explicitly rules out selection; correct outcome; good student answer
S069	2	This is the bottleneck effect, a type of genetic drift. When a population becomes very small, allele frequencies can change randomly. The genetic diversity will decrease because alleles can be randomly lost and not recovered without mutation.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; mentions mutation requirement; solid understanding
S070	2	Genetic drift is the mechanism. The population went from very large to very small in an instant, which causes allele frequencies to change randomly. The genetic diversity will decline because some alleles will disappear by chance in the small population.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; clear reasoning; good answer
S071	2	The mechanism is genetic drift due to a bottleneck. The destruction was random and non-selective, so the surviving population is a random sample of the original. Genetic diversity will decrease over time because random drift causes alleles to be lost.	Correct mechanism; correct reasoning; correct outcome; solid student answer
S072	2	This is genetic drift caused by a population bottleneck. The random destruction created a smaller population with different allele frequencies. Genetic diversity will be reduced because alleles will be randomly lost in the small population.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; explanation is straightforward and correct
S073	2	Genetic drift is the evolutionary mechanism. The population experienced a bottleneck when 90% was destroyed. The genetic diversity will decrease because alleles can be randomly eliminated in a small population.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; basic explanation but accurate
S074	3	The evolutionary mechanism responsible is genetic drift, specifically the bottleneck effect. The construction randomly destroyed 90% of the population, which is a non-selective event. This means the surviving plants represent a random sample of the original population's alleles. Because of random sampling effects, the allele frequencies in the surviving population will be different from the original population.

The genetic diversity will decrease in subsequent generations. Because the population is now small, genetic drift becomes a dominant force. Random fluctuations in allele frequency will cause some alleles to be lost by chance. Once lost, these alleles cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow, so the population will have progressively less genetic diversity.	Correct mechanism with good explanation; correct outcome with appropriate reasoning; well-developed answer
S075	3	The mechanism is genetic drift caused by a bottleneck effect. The construction project randomly removed individuals without selecting for any traits, so this is a non-selective event. The surviving population is a random subsample of the original population, and their allele frequencies will likely differ.

Genetic diversity will decrease over subsequent generations. In a small population, genetic drift causes random changes in allele frequency that often result in alleles being lost. Without mutation or gene flow, lost alleles cannot be recovered. The population will gradually lose genetic diversity.	Correct mechanism; clear reasoning; correct outcome; well-organized answer
S076	3	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift due to a population bottleneck. The random destruction of 90% of the population caused the surviving individuals to be a random sample of the original population. This means allele frequencies changed due to chance, not natural selection.

The genetic diversity will be reduced in subsequent generations. Random genetic drift in small populations causes alleles to be randomly lost. As alleles are lost, genetic diversity decreases. Without mutation or gene flow, the diversity cannot be restored.	Correct mechanism; clear reasoning; correct outcome; addresses mutation/gene flow appropriately
S077	3	This is genetic drift in the form of a bottleneck effect. The construction project caused a random reduction in population size. The surviving plants represent a random sample of the original population's genetic composition. Allele frequencies changed due to random sampling alone, not natural selection.

The genetic diversity will decrease over time. Random genetic drift in small populations causes the loss of alleles through random sampling error. Once alleles are lost, they cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow. Therefore, the population will progressively lose genetic diversity.	Correct mechanism with good explanation; correct outcome with appropriate reasoning; strong answer
S078	3	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift caused by a bottleneck effect. The population was randomly reduced through the construction project, which is non-selective. The surviving population is a random sample of the original population, so allele frequencies changed by chance.

Genetic diversity will decrease in subsequent generations because genetic drift in small populations randomly causes alleles to be lost. Once an allele is lost, it cannot be recovered without mutation or gene flow. So the population will have less genetic diversity over time.	Correct mechanism; clear reasoning; correct outcome; well-understood
S079	3	The mechanism is genetic drift due to a bottleneck. The construction randomly destroyed 90% of the population. The surviving plants are a random sample of the original population, so their allele frequencies may differ.

In subsequent generations, genetic diversity will decrease. Small populations are susceptible to genetic drift, which randomly eliminates alleles. Without mutation or gene flow to restore lost alleles, the population's genetic diversity will decline.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; mentions recovery conditions; solid understanding
S080	3	Genetic drift is the evolutionary mechanism responsible for the change in allele frequencies. The bottleneck effect reduced the population size randomly. The surviving population is a random sample of the original population. Genetic diversity will decrease in subsequent generations because alleles will be randomly lost through the process of genetic drift in this small population.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; clear and accurate
S081	2	The mechanism is genetic drift, which happens when a population gets smaller and allele frequencies change by chance. The genetic diversity will decrease because in a small population, some alleles will randomly disappear.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; explanation is quite brief but accurate
S082	2	Genetic drift is the mechanism. The population became small, and now allele frequencies will change randomly. Genetic diversity will be lower because alleles will be lost.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; very brief but essentially correct
S083	2	The bottleneck effect is a form of genetic drift. The population is now small, so allele frequencies will change randomly. Genetic diversity will decrease because some alleles will be randomly lost in a small population.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; basic explanation but fundamentally sound
S084	1	The evolutionary mechanism is natural selection acting on the surviving plants because they must have been more fit to survive the construction. The allele frequencies changed because the fit plants had certain alleles. Genetic diversity will either stay the same or increase because natural selection will keep the best alleles.	Incorrectly identifies mechanism as natural selection; misunderstands randomness of destruction; wrongly predicts diversity outcome
S085	1	This is genetic drift, but genetic diversity will probably stay about the same because the population still has both alleles. The F and f alleles are both present, so the diversity hasn't really changed.	Correctly identifies drift; major misconception that diversity depends on presence of alleles, not frequency; misunderstands allele diversity
S086	1	Genetic drift is the mechanism because the population got smaller. But the genetic diversity might not decrease much because natural selection will work to maintain genetic diversity in the population. Natural selection acts to preserve genetic variation.	Correctly identifies drift; wrongly invokes natural selection to maintain diversity; misunderstands natural selection's role
S087	1	The mechanism is genetic drift from the bottleneck. Genetic diversity will decrease, but this is only temporary. Once the population grows back to its original size, the diversity will return to the original level.	Correctly identifies drift and bottleneck; wrongly assumes population will grow back; misunderstands permanent diversity loss
S088	0	The construction project caused natural selection to act on the population. The plants that survived the construction must have had traits that helped them survive, so those plants have the best genes. Genetic diversity will increase because only the best genes are left now.	Incorrectly attributes mechanism to natural selection; predicts increased diversity; misunderstands randomness
S089	0	Natural selection is the mechanism. The construction killed the weaker plants, and the stronger plants survived. The genetic diversity will increase because the population now only has the strong alleles, which is good for the population.	Confuses drift with natural selection; predicts increased diversity; misunderstands diversity concept
S090	0	Mutations are causing the allele frequencies to change. The surviving plants will experience mutations that create new alleles, which will increase the genetic diversity of the population significantly.	Misidentifies cause as mutation; wrongly predicts increased diversity; ignores the "no mutation" condition
S091	0	The allele frequencies are changing because of gene flow. Some new plants are moving into the population from outside, which is changing the allele frequencies and increasing the genetic diversity.	Misidentifies mechanism as gene flow; ignores the isolated population condition; wrongly predicts increased diversity
S092	0	Genetic drift is the mechanism, but the genetic diversity will stay the same because random mating will keep the alleles in the same proportions. The population will reach Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium and stay there.	Correctly identifies drift but major misconception about random mating preventing drift; wrongly predicts constant diversity; misapplies HWE
S093	1	The mechanism is genetic drift due to the bottleneck. But genetic diversity will probably increase because the population will experience new mutations that create additional alleles over time.	Correctly identifies drift and bottleneck; wrongly predicts increased diversity due to mutations; ignores the "no mutation" condition
S094	1	This is genetic drift because the population became small. However, the genetic diversity will remain relatively unchanged because the F and f alleles are both still present in the population, which is what genetic diversity means.	Correctly identifies drift; major misconception about what determines genetic diversity; wrongly predicts unchanged diversity
S095	1	The evolutionary mechanism is genetic drift in a small population. But I think the genetic diversity might increase slightly because when the population is smaller, the plants might become more closely related, and... actually I'm not sure, but it might increase.	Correctly identifies drift; confused reasoning about diversity; uncertain conclusion; misunderstands relationship between population size and diversity
S096	2	Genetic drift is the mechanism because the population got much smaller from the construction. The destruction was random, not based on fitness. Genetic diversity will decrease over time because alleles are randomly lost in small populations.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; good reasoning; solid answer
S097	2	The bottleneck effect caused genetic drift in this population. The allele frequencies changed randomly because the surviving plants are a random sample of the original population. Genetic diversity will be reduced because alleles will be randomly eliminated.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; good reasoning; acceptable answer
S098	2	Genetic drift is the evolutionary mechanism because the population became very small very quickly. This is random change in allele frequencies. Genetic diversity will decrease because alleles are lost by chance in small populations.	Correct mechanism; correct outcome; somewhat informal but essentially correct
S099	3	The mechanism is genetic drift, specifically a bottleneck effect. The construction randomly destroyed 90% of the population without selecting based on plant traits. The surviving population represents a random sample of the original population's alleles. Allele frequencies changed due to random sampling effects, not natural selection.

Genetic diversity will decrease in subsequent generations. In a small population, genetic drift randomly causes alleles to be lost. Without mutation or gene flow, these lost alleles cannot be recovered. The population will progressively lose genetic diversity over time.	Correct mechanism with clear explanation; correct outcome with solid reasoning; well-developed answer
S100	3	The evolutionary mechanism responsible is genetic drift due to a bottleneck effect. The random destruction of 90% of the population caused the allele frequencies to change due to chance, not natural selection. The surviving population is a random sample of the original population.

The genetic diversity of the population will decrease in subsequent generations. Because the population is now small, genetic drift becomes a dominant evolutionary force. Alleles can be randomly lost, and without mutation or gene flow, they cannot be recovered. Therefore, genetic diversity will be progressively reduced.	Correct mechanism with good explanation; correct outcome with appropriate reasoning; strong understanding